first of all let's call a spade a spade
this is a torture program waterboarding
was supposed to be the ultimate
technique but there were a couple that
were that were clearly worse than
waterboarding you went to Guantanamo in
2002 can you say what you were doing
there so at what point do you find out
about the enan interrogation program
well I was back at headquarters in uh
May of
2002 and I was in the
cafeteria and a a friend of mine from
the counterterrorism center came up to
me and said very offhandedly hey I'm so
glad I ran into you I meant to ask do
you want to be certified in the use of
enhanced interrogation techniques and I
had never heard that term
before I said what's that mean he goes
we're going to start getting rough with
these guys and I said well what does
thatan mean and he said well we're going
to do and he listed these 10 techniques
water boarding and sleep deprivation and
you know smack in the face and all these
different kinds of
things I said that sounds like a torture
program to me and he goes no it's not
torture the president approved it and
the justice department approved it and
we're gonna we're going to start on
it I said I I don't know I I think I
have a problem with that let me think
about it for an hour so I went back up
to the seventh floor there was a very
senior CI officer up there who I had
worked for 10 years
earlier and I said hey I just got
approached and asked if I wanted to be
certified in these enhanced
interrogation techniques what do you
think of that and he said first of all
let's call a spade a spade this is a
this is a torture program and you know
how these guys are he says somebody's
going to go overboard and they're going
to kill a prisoner and when that happens
there's going to be a a congressional
investigation and then a Justice
Department investigation and somebody's
going to go to prison you want to go to
prison and I said no I don't want to go
to prison so I went back downstairs I
said this is a torture program I want
nothing to do with it so they asked 14
people and I'm sorry to say that I was
the only one who said no two of us said
no in the beginning and then one changed
his mind but I was the only one in the
end that said no I'm glad I did in
retrospect I was right they were wrong
but uh but things got much much worse
before they got any better how
so well they started torturing OB on the
2nd of of
August 2002 and it was a slippery slope
um they did many many many things not
just to abuaba but to to most if not all
of our high value uh prisoners that were
never authorized by the justice
department or by the president
you know you can't force hummus up
someone's rectum for
example right you can't play Russian
roulette with them you can't you know
they learned abua had an irrational fear
of insects and so they put them in a
coffin and they dumped a box of
cockroaches in there with him and then
closed the coffin and they left him in
there for 10 days just with a diaper you
can't do that nobody told you you had
permission to do something like
that you know and waterboarding was
supposed to be the
ultimate
technique but there were a couple that
were that were clearly worse than
waterboarding uh sleep deprivation
right we know from the American
Psychological Association which has done
studies on this kind of thing that
people begin to go insane at seven days
with no sleep they begin to die of organ
failure with 99 days without
sleep the CIA was authorized to keep
prisoners awake for 12
days people died from sleep deprivation
another one was something called the
cold cell where they strip a prisoner
naked they chain you to an eyebolt in
the ceiling so that you can't sit or lay
or get comfortable in any way they chill
your cell to 50° fahren and then every
hour somebody goes in and throws a
bucket of ice water on you we murdered
two prisoners with that technique that
was never approved as a technique you
know so we did all kinds of stuff there
was another thing a technique that was
that was considered to be kind of a mild
no big deal kind of thing called
Walling
where they they roll up a towel and put
it around your neck and then they shove
you into a wall
right well the wall it's a what do you
call it fiber board piece of plywood
piece of plywood whatever there's
there's a little bit of give and they
have the towel so that you don't get
Whiplash but they never used a towel
they never used anything around the neck
and it wasn't a plywood wall it was a
concrete block wall and now we have for
example Muhammad atar the nephew of khik
Muhammad who was slammed so mercilessly
against the wall
that he's now brain damaged to the point
where he can't participate in his own
defense they gave him permanent lifelong
brain
damage where does it say you were
authorized to do
that so it really was a slippery slope
and nobody was ever punished nobody will
ever be called to account um just uh
just recently we're filming this in in
early September um the last week of
August of 2023
uh the defense department admitted that
they cannot try Ramsey B aib one of the
the 911 uh co-conspirators they cannot
try him because he's insane he's
clinically insane why is he insane
because of sleep deprivation do you
think that's [__] though no because
this is the pentagon's psychiatrist
who's saying he's insane not his defense
attorneys huh yeah now guess it goes
back to your point before about you know
you Consulting the your higher up at at
the agency and he said you know listen
somebody's going to go
overboard
um and yeah I read I read uh Jim
Mitchell's book who was the Air Force
psychologist that with Bruce jesson
designed correct the AIT program and I
and I guess the towel around the neck uh
was supposed to be some sort of
pavlovian conditioning where just the
feel of the towel going around the neck
much of it was supposed to be pevo
yes it they called it
learned helplessness that's what it was
learned helplessness so all they would
have to do is roll up the towel and the
Prisoner would just crumple
yeah so I guess it's worth just um
giving some context to The Listener as
to why these things were even done in
the first place right so the reason why
they were done is something called the
ticking Time Bomb scenario the ticking
Time Bomb
scenario
is you've just
captured let's say Abu
Zeda and you know that Al-Qaeda is
planning something big because Osama Bin
Laden said he was planning something
that would dwarf 911 right and you've
got to get the information before the
bomb goes off so you say hey I was a
beta give me the information he's like
[__] you I'm not going to give you the
information so what do you do do you
waterboard him do you sleep deprive him
do you put him in a cold cell do you
beat him do you put cockroaches on him
do you put hummus up his ass what do you
do now the problems with that are
severalfold first of all all of it's
illegal secondly there really is no such
thing as the ticking Time Bomb that's
only in the movies it's never happened
in real life it just doesn't besides
even if it did happen when you're
torturing somebody they give you
everything they think you want to hear
just to get you to stop torturing them
and so then it's going to take six
months for the analyst to sort through
it to figure out what's true and what's
[__] you know and by then the bomb's
gone off
anyway and again we're either going to
be the international you know shining
Beacon of Hope for human rights and
civil rights and civil liberties or
we're not yeah but we we can't have it
both ways uh I mentioned a few minutes
ago uh Ramsey been a ship being declared
insane even if he had been declared
sane nothing that he said can be used
against him at trial because the CIA
tortured it out of him nothing that KH
shik Muhammad said nothing that Abu
zubeda said or that or that ABD manesar
said none of it can be used against them
in
trial so what do we do we continue to
hold them illegally without charge or we
let him go the bottom line here is the
CIA royally [__] this
up and that's why every time the CIA
would start to torture prisoners every
time Mitchell and jessen were put in
charge of the interrogation sessions at
the black sites every FBI FBI person in
the country would
leave the FBI didn't even want to be in
the same country where this torture was
taking place yeah you know like I say it
kills me to compliment the FBI but they
were right and the CIA was wrong and
here we are 22 years after 911 literally
no one has been prosecuted for that
crime no one yeah nor will anyone be
prosecuted because the CIA ensured that
no prosecutions could be carried out
ironically you're the only one that went
to prison for I'm the only one that went
to prison yeah so last thing on this and
I'm just playing a little bit of Devil's
Advocate here because I think it's
important to listen to All arguments
like I would I would like to have you in
here just as I would like to have Jim
mitel in here Jose Rodriguez sure and
decide for myself and I hope the
listeners do the same I agree and I'm
just I I I can't help but think about
September 12th man
and I there's a quote in tenant's book
where he says
something along the lines of all major
foreign policy decisions after 911 were
viewed through the prism of smoke from
the World Trade Center in the Pentagon
absolutely true so when I think about
the intent of Jose Rodriguez of Jim
Mitchell of Bruce jessen um I think
about hindsight being 2020 the ticking
Time Bomb situation frantically trying
to save American lives when everybody
was running around like a [__]
chicken with their head cut off when you
look back and you think about the
enhanced interrogation program what role
does intent play for
you I I believe that all of the people
that you mentioned um had good
intentions I think that this points to a
bigger problem at the CIA where you put
sociopaths in positions of authority
where they come to believe that they're
Above the Law and that because they're
the good guys they can and should do
anything that they want to do but I I'm
confident that Jose Rodriguez thinks
he's the good guy and that James
Mitchell and Bruce jessen think they're
the good
guys no doubt in my
mind um at the same
time when there's a program that is as
controversial and as potentially
dangerous as the EIT program you need
some way to put the breakes on it we
already know that the Congressional
oversight system doesn't work it just it
just doesn't you can't have 12 staffers
on Capitol Hill overseeing an agency of
25 or 30,000 people you just can't it
doesn't work um at the same time the the
oversight committees have been Have
Become nothing but cheerleaders for the
CIA rather than than the breaks on outof
control CIA policies MH and you know
when it comes to things like open
criminal
investigations the CIA needed to swallow
its pride and defer to the FBI and they
just wouldn't they wouldn't do it and a
lot of that was because of of a guilty
conscience of having fallen asleep at
the switch and allowed night11 to take
place in the first
place
but you know the torture program nothing
good came out of it literally
nothing um you went to Guantanamo in
2002 can you say what you were doing
there it was an interim
assignment
um I was a big star after I was beta one
of the Mony mucks came up and said
listen we've got a an underlap uh do you
want to be Chief in Guantanamo for for a
little while and I said I've never been
to Cuba I'd love to go to Cuba so it's
summertime it's pretty hot I said okay
I'll go so I went just filled in for for
somebody until a permanent uh Chief was
named what was that like being over
there hot yeah and one of the things
that that's striking about Guantanamo
and I would I would guess that this is
probably still the
case is no one has any idea of what the
the other guy is
doing right like I'm used to working
with people from a whole bunch of
different age he like hey FBI guy how
you doing buddy hey DEA guy keep up the
good work oh you're the ATF guy we
should have a beer sometime you know
that's what that's how it is in every
Embassy like
Guantanamo you're walking past somebody
you put your head
down like who's he I don't know and I'm
not telling him who I am and all that
guy knows is those buildings over there
don't go over there that's what do they
call it
OG another government uh other
government agency they don't even like
to say the letters CIA they just say
OG yeah don't go over to that side and
then like you can hear people screaming
over there yeah it's not
good what's up guys thank you so much
for taking the time to watch the
interview um as you could probably tell
this is a brand new channel so if you
guys anything out of this at all please
like the video leave me a comment tell
me what you thought tell me who you'd
like to see on the show um I see every
like I read every comment and I
appreciate all of it especially in the
beginning because as you know that kind
of support goes a long way on these
platforms so most importantly I have
some awesome guests coming up in the
future for interviews um so please
subscribe to the channel so you don't
miss any of them but again thank you for
your timee appreciate the support and
hope to see you again soon